Timeboost gentle intro (#1749)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/how-arbitrum-works/timeboost/gentle-introduction.mdx

Timeboost is the culmination of over a year of research and development by the team at Offchain Labs and will soon be available for any Arbitrum chain, including Arbitrum One and Arbitrum Nova (should the Arbitrum DAO choose to adopt it). Like all features and upgrades to the Arbitrum technology stack, Timeboost will be rolled out on Arbitrum Sepolia first for testing, and chain owners will have the option of adopting Timeboost at any time or customizing Timeboost in any way they choose.

### In a nutshell

- The current <a data-quicklook-from='first-come-first-serve-fcfs'>"First-Come, First-Serve (FCFS)"</a> ordering policy has many benefits, including a great UX and protection from harmful types of MEV. However, nearly all MEV on the chain is extracted by searchers who invest wastefully in hardware and spamming to win latency races (which negatively strains the network and leads to congestion). Timeboost is a new transaction ordering policy that preserves many of the great benefits of FCFS while unlocking a path for chain owners to capture some of the available MEV on their network and introducing an auction to reduce latency, racing, and, ultimately, spam.

> - Timeboost introduces a few new components to an Arbitrum chain’s infrastructure: a sealed-bid second-price auction and a new <a data-quicklook-from='express-lane'>"express lane"</a> at an Arbitrum chain’s sequencer. Valid transactions submitted to the express lane will be sequenced immediately with no delay, while all other transactions submitted to the chain’s sequencer will experience a nominal delay (default: 200ms). The auction winner is granted the sole right to control the express lane for pre-defined, temporary intervals.

Reviewer: Is it worth adding here that block production time is maintained at 250ms? 
It is mentioned in the sections below, but I think it's low lift to add it also here and it might prevent potential misunderstandings.

## Why do Arbitrum chains need Timeboost?

Today, Arbitrum chains order incoming transactions on a <a data-quicklook-from='first-come-first-serve-fcfs'>"First-Come, First-Serve (FCFS)"</a> basis. This ordering policy was chosen as the default for Arbitrum chains because it is simple to understand and implement, enables fast block times (starting at 250ms and down to 100ms if desired), and protects users from harmful types of MEV like front-running & sandwich attacks.

However, there are a few downsides to an FCFS ordering policy. Under FCFS, searchers are incentivized to participate in and try to win latency races through investments in off-chain hardware. This means that for searchers on Arbitrum chains, generating a profit from arbitrage and liquidation opportunities involves a lot of spam, placing stress on chain infrastructure and contributing to congestion. Additionally, all of the captured MEV on an Arbitrum chain today under FCFS goes to searchers - returning none of the available MEV to the chain owner or the applications on the chain.

Timeboost retains most FCFS benefits while addressing FCFS limitations.

> #### Timeboost preserves the great UX that Arbitrum chains are known for
> 
> - The default block time for Arbitrum chains will continue to be industry-leading at 250ms, even after Timeboost. What will change with Timeboost is that some transactions not in the express lane will be delayed to the next block.
> 
> #### With Timeboost, Arbitrum chains will continue to protect users from harmful types of MEV
> 
> - Timeboost only grants the auction winner a _temporary time advantage_ - not the power to view or re-order incoming transactions or be the first in every block. Furthermore, the mempool for transactions will continue to be private, which means users with Timeboost enabled will continue to be protected from harmful MEV-like front-running and sandwich attacks.
> 
> #### Timeboost unlocks a new value accrual path for chain owners
> 
> - Chain owners may use Timeboost to capture a portion of the available MEV on their chain that would have otherwise gone entirely to searchers. There are many flavors of this, too - including custom gas tokens and/or redistribution of these proceeds back to the applications and users on the chain.
> 
> #### Timeboost may help reduce spam and congestion on a network
> 
> - By introducing the ability to “purchase a time advantage” through the Timeboost auction, it is expected that rational, profit-seeking actors will spend on auctions _instead of_ investing in hardware or infrastructure to win latency races. This diversion of resources by these actors is expected to reduce FCFS MEV-driven spam on the network.

Author: ```suggestion
#### Timeboost preserves the great UX that Arbitrum chains are known for

- The default block time for Arbitrum chains will continue to be industry-leading at 250ms, even after Timeboost. What will change with Timeboost is that some transactions not in the express lane will be delayed to the next block.

#### With Timeboost, Arbitrum chains will continue to protect users from harmful types of MEV

- Timeboost only grants the auction winner a _temporary time advantage_ - not the power to view or reorder incoming transactions or be the first in every block. Furthermore, the transactions mempool will continue to be private, which means users with Timeboost enabled will continue to be protected from harmful MEV-like front-running and sandwich attacks.

#### Timeboost unlocks a new value accrual path for chain owners

- Chain owners may use Timeboost to capture a portion of the available MEV on their chain that would have otherwise gone entirely to searchers. There are many flavors of this, too - including custom gas tokens and/or redistribution of these proceeds back to the applications and users on the chain.

#### Timeboost may help reduce spam and congestion on a network

- By introducing the ability to “purchase a time advantage” through the Timeboost auction, it is expected that rational, profit-seeking actors will spend on auctions _instead of_ investing in hardware or infrastructure to win latency races. This diversion of resources by these actors is expected to reduce FCFS MEV-driven spam on the network.
```

## What is Timeboost, and how does it work?

> Timeboost is a _transaction ordering policy_. It's a set of rules that the sequencer of an Arbitrum chain is trusted to follow when ordering transactions submitted by users. In the near future, multiple sequencers will be able to enforce those rules with decentralized Timeboost.
> 
> For Arbitrum chains, the sequencer’s sole job is to take arriving, valid transactions from users, place them into an order dictated by the transaction ordering policy, and then publish the final sequence to a real-time feed and in compressed batches to the chain’s data availability layer. The current transaction ordering policy is FCFS, and Timeboost is a modified FCFS ordering policy.
> 
> Timeboost is implemented using three separate components that work together:
> 
> - **A special “express lane”** which allows valid transactions to be sequenced as soon as the sequencer receives them for a given round.
> - **An off-chain auction** to determine the controller of the express lane for a given round. This auction is managed by an <a data-quicklook-from='autonomous-auctioneer'>autonomous auctioneer</a>.
> - **An <a data-quicklook-from='auction-contract'>auction contract</a>**, deployed on the target chain to serve as the canonical source of truth for the auction results and handling of auction proceeds.

Author: ```suggestion
Timeboost is a _transaction ordering policy_. It's a set of rules that the sequencer of an Arbitrum chain is trusted to follow when ordering transactions submitted by users. In the near future, multiple sequencers will be able to enforce those rules with decentralized Timeboost.

For Arbitrum chains, the sequencer’s sole job is to take arriving, valid transactions from users, place them into an order dictated by the transaction ordering policy, and then publish the final sequence to a real-time feed and in compressed batches to the chain’s data availability layer. The current transaction ordering policy is FCFS, and Timeboost is a modified FCFS ordering policy.

Timeboost is implemented using three separate components that work together:

- **A special “express lane”** which allows valid transactions to be sequenced as soon as the sequencer receives them for a given round.
- **An off-chain auction** to determine the controller of the express lane for a given round. This auction is managed by an <a data-quicklook-from='autonomous-auctioneer'>autonomous auctioneer</a>.
- **An <a data-quicklook-from='auction-contract'>auction contract</a>**deployed on the target chain to serve as the canonical source of truth for the auction results and handling of auction proceeds.
```

### The Timeboost auction

Control of the express lane in each round (default: 60 seconds) is determined by a per-round auction, which is a sealed-bid, second-price auction. This auction is held to determine the express lane controller for the next round. In other words, the express lane controller was determined at any point in time in the previous auction round. Bids for the auction can be made with any ERC20 token, in any amount, and be collected by any address - at the full discretion of the chain owner.

![timeboost auction workflow](./images/centralized-timeboost-auction-workflow.jpg)

The auction for a round has a closing time that is `auctionClosingSeconds` (default: 15) seconds before the beginning of the round. This means that, in the default parameters, parties have 45 seconds to submit bids before the auction will no longer accept bids. In the 15 seconds between when bids are no longer accepted and when the new round begins, the autonomous auctioneer will verify all bids, determine the winner, and make a call to the on-chain auction contract to formally resolve the auction.

### Auction contract

> Before bidding in the auction, a party must deposit funds into the Auction Contract. Deposits can be made, or funds can be added to an existing deposit at any time. There is no minimum deposit amount, but there is a starting minimum bid of 0.001 ETH (default amount and token). These deposits are fully withdrawable, with some nominal delay (2 rounds, or 2 minutes by default), so as not to impact the outcome of an existing round.

Reviewer: How likely is the default minimum bid to change?
If the plan is to update it depending on usage, I would maybe change the language of this sentence
`but there is a starting minimum bid of 0.001 ETH (default amount and token)`
to something like
`but there is a defined minimum bid, which by default starts at 0.001 ETH`

> Before bidding in the auction, a party must deposit funds into the Auction Contract. Deposits can be made, or funds can be added to an existing deposit at any time. There is no minimum deposit amount, but there is a starting minimum bid of 0.001 ETH (default amount and token). These deposits are fully withdrawable, with some nominal delay (2 rounds, or 2 minutes by default), so as not to impact the outcome of an existing round.

Reviewer 2: Its not currently likely that 

```suggestion
Before placing a bid in the auction, a party must deposit funds into the Auction Contract. Deposits can be made, or funds can be added to an existing deposit at any time. These deposits are fully withdrawable, with some nominal delay (2 rounds, or 2 minutes by default), so as not to impact the outcome of an existing round. There is no minimum deposit amount, but there is a starting minimum bid of 0.001 ETH (default amount and token) called the "minimum reserve price". The minimum reserve price is set by the chain owner and can be updated at any time up to 30 seconds (default) before the start of the next round to ensure the auction participants will always know the reserve price at least 30 seconds before they must submit their bids. A reserve price can also be set by the chain owner (or by an address designated by the chain owner) as a way to raise the minimum bid as the Auction Contract enforces that the reserve price is never less than the minimum reserve price.
```

| `reservePrice`          | The minimum bid amount accepted by the auction contract for Timeboost auctions, denominated in `_biddingToken`.                                                                                                                | None                                       |
| `_minReservePrice`      | A value that must be equal to or below the `reservePrice` to act as a "floor minimum" for Timeboost bids. Enforced by the auction contract.                                                                                    | 0.001 `WETH`                               |

## Who is Timeboost for, and how do I use it?

Timeboost is an optional addition to an Arbitrum chain’s infrastructure, meaning that enabling Timeboost is at the discretion of the chain owner and that an Arbitrum chain can fully function normally without Timeboost.

When enabled, Timeboost is meant to serve different groups of parties with varying degrees of impact and benefits. Let’s go through them below:

#### For regular users:

> Timeboost will have a minimal impact. Non-express lane transactions will be delayed by a nominal 200ms, which means to the average user, their transactions will take up to 450ms to be sequenced (up from 200ms). Regular users will remain protected from harmful MEV activity, such as sandwich attacks and front-running.

Reviewer: > their transactions will take up to 450ms to be sequenced
Is it "up to" or is it "at least"? If there's a lot of traffic, I think my transaction might take longer than 250ms to be sequenced (before applying the delay)

Reviewer 2: i think its "approximately" since we cannot guarantee anything. I'll change it
```suggestion
Timeboost will have a minimal impact. Non-express lane transactions will be delayed by a nominal 200ms, which means to the average user, their transactions will take approximately 450ms to be sequenced and included into a block (up from approximately 200ms). All users will remain protected from harmful MEV activity, such as sandwich attacks and front-running, through the continued use of a private mempool.
```
